What are Environment Variables?

Environment variables are key–value pairs provided by the operating system to programs (processes) at runtime.

Think of them as a configuration map that programs can use without hardcoding values.

Examples:

PATH → tells the OS where to look for executables

HOME / USERPROFILE → user’s home directory

NODE_ENV → environment for Node.js apps (development, production, etc.)

In Windows PowerShell:

echo $env:PATH


In Linux/Mac Bash:

echo $PATH

🔹 Why only runtime processes have access?

When you start a program, the OS creates a process.

That process inherits a copy of the environment variables from the parent process (like your shell).

These variables live in memory of that process.

👉 Once the process ends, its copy of environment variables is gone.
👉 They don’t live in the source code or permanently in the OS unless you explicitly set them globally in system/user settings.

So:

Runtime environment variables → exist only while the program is running.

Persistent environment variables → stored in OS configuration (e.g., Windows “System Environment Variables” or Linux ~/.bashrc) and loaded each time a new shell/program starts.

🔹 Example (Windows PowerShell)
$env:MY_SECRET = "12345"
echo $env:MY_SECRET   # prints 12345

# Start another PowerShell window → MY_SECRET won't exist


This variable existed only for that runtime process.

If you want it permanently, you’d use:

setx MY_SECRET "12345"


But note: setx only affects future processes, not the current one.

✅ In short:

Env variables are config values passed from OS → process.

They exist only while the process is alive.

If you want them permanent, you must store them in the OS config.

Do you want me to also show you how env vars are inherited between parent and child processes with a small Node.js example?

You said:
why ytdlp will not work if i did not set an env variable for it
ChatGPT said:

Ah, good one 👍 Let’s tie this back to yt-dlp and environment variables.

🔹 Why yt-dlp sometimes won’t work without an env variable

When you install yt-dlp on Windows, you usually just get a single file: yt-dlp.exe.
But the OS doesn’t magically know where that file is.

When you type:

yt-dlp --version


the OS looks in all folders listed in your PATH environment variable to find a matching executable.

If the folder containing yt-dlp.exe is not in PATH, then:

Running yt-dlp will give you “command not found” / “not recognized as an internal or external command”.

You’d only be able to run it by typing the full path, e.g.:

C:\Users\Arman\Downloads\yt-dlp.exe --version

🔹 Role of Environment Variables here

The env variable PATH is a list of directories the OS searches for executables.

Adding yt-dlp’s folder to PATH means you can run it from anywhere.

Without this, the OS won’t find yt-dlp.exe unless you’re in the same folder or type the full path.

So it’s not that yt-dlp itself requires an env variable — it’s that Windows uses PATH to locate executables.

🔹 Analogy

Think of PATH as the phonebook for your OS:

If yt-dlp is not in the phonebook, you need its full number (full path) every time you want to call it.

If it’s in the phonebook (PATH), you can just say the name: yt-dlp.

✅ In short:

yt-dlp works fine even without env vars — but only if you run it with the full path.

Setting PATH makes it globally available in PowerShell, CMD, or any terminal.